Task 4: Theory Questions
 
 
1. How can I restrict access to certain columns of a table?
------------------------------------------------------------
 
I can grant SELECT only on specific columns instead of the whole table.
The user can then query only those columns and gets an error if they try to read anything else.
 
Here is how I would do it in dvdrental:
 
    -- I let rentaluser see names but not email
    GRANT SELECT (customer_id, first_name, last_name, active)
        ON public.customer
        TO rentaluser;
 
    -- This works for rentaluser:
    SELECT
        customer.customer_id,
        LOWER(customer.first_name) AS first_name,
        LOWER(customer.last_name) AS last_name
    FROM public.customer AS customer;
 
    -- This fails for rentaluser:
    SELECT customer.email FROM public.customer AS customer;
    -- ERROR: permission denied for table customer
 
Another option is to create a view that only exposes the safe columns and grant SELECT on the view:
 
    CREATE VIEW public.customer_public_info AS
    SELECT
        customer.customer_id,
        LOWER(customer.first_name) AS first_name,
        LOWER(customer.last_name) AS last_name
    FROM public.customer AS customer;
 
    GRANT SELECT ON public.customer_public_info TO rentaluser;
 
Real scenario:
A call-center agent needs to look up a customer by name but must never see the email address or payment data.
Column-level grants make sure the agent's account can only read names and IDs.
This is a common requirement under GDPR.
 
 
2. What is the difference between identification and authentication?
--------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Identification is when a user says who they are, for example by providing a username.
Authentication is when the system checks whether that claim is true, for example by verifying a password.
 
Identification alone is not enough. Without authentication, anyone could claim to be any user.
 
Example from dvdrental:
 
    -- I created rentaluser with a password:
    CREATE USER rentaluser WITH PASSWORD 'rentalpassword';
 
    -- When rentaluser connects, PostgreSQL first reads the username (identification).
    -- Then it checks the password against what is stored in pg_authid (authentication).
 
    -- If the password is wrong:
    -- FATAL: password authentication failed for user "rentaluser"
 
Real scenario:
A shop employee opens the point-of-sale app, which connects to dvdrental.
The app sends the username (identification) and then the password (authentication).
If the password check fails, PostgreSQL refuses the connection before any data is touched.
 
 
3. What authentication methods does PostgreSQL recommend?
---------------------------------------------------------
 
PostgreSQL supports several methods, configured in pg_hba.conf.
Here are the most important ones:
 
trust
    No password is needed at all. Only safe for isolated local sockets used by system processes.
    I would never use this for application users.
 
md5
    Password is hashed with MD5. It is the old default but md5 is weak today and should be replaced.
 
scram-sha-256 (recommended)
    This is the modern standard. Passwords are never sent in plaintext and are salted,
    which makes offline cracking much harder. I should use this for all password logins.
 
cert
    The client presents an SSL certificate instead of a password. Very strong.
    I would use this for service-to-service connections.
 
ldap / gss / sspi
    These connect PostgreSQL to a company directory like Active Directory or Kerberos.
    Good for large organizations that already manage users centrally.
 
Example from dvdrental:
 
    -- The recommended pg_hba.conf line for rentaluser:
    -- host dvdrental rentaluser 0.0.0.0/0 scram-sha-256
 
    -- I can check how the password is stored:
    SELECT
        pg_authid.rolname,
        LEFT(pg_authid.rolpassword, 20) AS password_method_prefix
    FROM pg_authid AS pg_authid
    WHERE LOWER(pg_authid.rolname) = LOWER('rentaluser');
    -- Output starts with: SCRAM-SHA-256$4096...
    -- This confirms the password is stored with strong hashing.
 
Real scenario:
The rental shop's web server is on a different machine from the database.
Using scram-sha-256 means that even if someone intercepts the network traffic,
they cannot replay the authentication exchange or recover the password from it.
 
 
4. What is proxy authentication and why does it make role-based access easier?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Proxy authentication means one login user connects to the database and then switches
to a different role for the actual work, without disconnecting.
 
In PostgreSQL I do this with SET ROLE:
 
    SET ROLE some_role;   -- switch to that role's permissions
    RESET ROLE;           -- switch back
 
This is called "proxy" because one set of credentials acts as a proxy for many roles.
 
Why it makes role-based access easier:
 
Instead of creating dozens of separate login users with passwords, I create one
application-level login user and let it switch into the right role depending on
who is using the app. The customer roles (like client_mary_smith) do not need
their own passwords. Access control is then managed through role membership,
not through credential management.
 
Example from dvdrental:
 
    -- I create one shared login for the application
    CREATE USER app_proxy WITH PASSWORD 'apppassword';
    GRANT CONNECT ON DATABASE dvdrental TO app_proxy;
 
    -- I let app_proxy switch into customer roles
    GRANT client_mary_smith TO app_proxy;
 
    -- When Mary Smith logs into the website, the app switches role:
    SET ROLE client_mary_smith;
 
    -- Now all queries run under Mary's permissions and RLS filters her data
    SELECT
        rental.rental_id,
        rental.rental_date,
        rental.customer_id
    FROM public.rental AS rental;
    -- Returns only Mary's rows because of the RLS policy
 
    -- After the request is done:
    RESET ROLE;
 
    -- If I want to revoke Mary's access, I just remove the membership:
    REVOKE client_mary_smith FROM app_proxy;
    -- No password change needed, no reconnection required.
 
Real scenario:
The DVD rental website has thousands of customers. Creating a separate PostgreSQL
login with a password for every customer would be impossible to manage.
Instead the web app always connects as app_proxy and switches to the right customer
role for each request. Row-level security then automatically filters all queries
to show only that customer's own data. This pattern is common in production
systems and works well with connection poolers like PgBouncer.
 